Dune recap blog post (#482)
trinodb/trino.io: _posts/2023-07-14-trino-fest-2023-dune.md

---
layout: post
title: "DuneSQL - A query engine for blockchain data"
author: "Miguel Filipe, Jonas Irgens Kylling, Ryan Duan"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
image: /assets/blog/trino-fest-2023/Dune.png
show_pagenav: false
---

The need to make blockchain data easily accessible has risen over the recent
years due to the rise of cryptocurrencies. Thus, Dune has made this their
mission: to make crypto data accessible. Dune is a community data platform for
querying public blockchain data and building beautiful dashboards. They use

> their own query engine called DuneSQL, a fork of TrinoSQL, to query blockchain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
their own query engine called DuneSQL, a fork of Trino, to query blockchain
```

> data. In Miguel and Jonas' talk, they talk about the challenges in querying

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data. In the talk, Miguel and Jonas from Dune talk about the challenges in querying
```

blockchain data, their transition to Trino, and how DuneSQL is operated. Give
the talk a listen or keep reading for a recap.

<!--more-->

{% youtube sCJncarnGdU %}

## Recap

A community data platform is a serverless, open access, community wide
collaboration portal or application that Dune uses for their query engine.

> However, they have some difficulties with blockchain data such as processing and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, they have some difficulties with blockchain data, such as processing and
```

ingesting raw data, deserializing and decoding function calls and arguments, and
allowing the community to build abstractions on top. In addition, their engine

> has 10000s of queries that are executed and saved and re-used each day.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
has tens of thousands of queries that are executed, saved, and re-used each day.
```

> At first, Dune used PostgreSQL where they sharded per blockchain and used a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At first, Dune used PostgreSQL, where they sharded per blockchain and used a
```

vertical scaling. However, they quickly ran into bottleneck issues on storage

> size and IOPS. Thus, they switched to Spark/Databricks for a horizontal scaling

Reviewer: IOPS probably needs to be spelled out, maybe in parentheses. Not an acronym you encounter super frequently.

> in order to adopt much more blockchains and to support the vast query volume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in order to adopt more blockchains and to support the vast query volume
```

> that they had, but this was not interactive enough and was often tied to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that they had. Unfortunately, this was not interactive enough and was often tied to the
```
Let's break it up into two sentences.

> vendor. In the end, Miguel says in that "Trino was our choice for performance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
vendor. In the end, Miguel says in that, "Trino was our choice for performance
```

reasons and for the good environment and ecosystem and to fully support our

> scheme and our datasets." Using Trino helped their performance issues and made

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
scheme and our datasets." Using Trino addressed the performance issues.
```

> their queries run faster than previous SQLs.

Reviewer 2: remove this line

> their queries run faster than previous SQLs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
their queries run faster than previous SQL engines.
```

> Operating DuneSQL requires more modification and extending Trino to suit the

Reviewer 2: This whole paragraph is a bit mixed up.

> Operating DuneSQL requires more modification and extending Trino to suit the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operating DuneSQL requires modifications and extensions of Trino to suit the
```

> needs of the users and platform as a whole. DuneSQL is able to handle 10000s of

Reviewer: tens of thousands again

queries per day and be able to provide the performance for different tiers. In

> addition, they use query execution services and Trino-Gateway to handle the

Reviewer: Embed a hyperlink to gateway: https://github.com/lyft/presto-gateway

scheduling and load balancing. With clusters, they have a fixed size in order
for it to have a predictable capacity and performance, and to reduce the
blast-radius so it does not affect other clusters. Even with all this, they have
much work to do as they plan to optimize the billions of S3 requests they

> receive, improve data layout, and implementing sandboxed user defined functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
receive, improve data layout, and implement sandboxed user defined functions.
```
Keep tense consistent.

---
layout: post
title: "DuneSQL - A query engine for blockchain data"
author: "Miguel Filipe, Jonas Irgens Kylling, Ryan Duan"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
image: /assets/blog/trino-fest-2023/Dune.png
show_pagenav: false
---

The need to make blockchain data easily accessible has risen over the recent

> years due to the rise of cryptocurrencies, NFTs, and other uses of blockchains.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
years due to the popularity of cryptocurrencies, NFTs, and other uses of blockchains.
```

> Dune has made it their mission to make crypto data more accessible. Dune is a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dune has made it their mission to make blockchain data more accessible. Dune is a
```

> Dune has made this their mission to make crypto data more accessible. Dune is a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dune has made it their mission to make crypto data more accessible. Dune is a
```

community data platform for querying public blockchain data and building

> beautiful dashboards. They use their own query engine called DuneSQL, a fork of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
beautiful dashboards. They use their own query engine called DuneSQL, built as extension of 
```

> Trino, to query blockchain data. In the talk, Miguel and Jonas from Dune talk

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Trino, to query blockchain data. In the session, Miguel and Jonas from Dune talk
```

about the challenges of querying blockchain data, their transition to Trino, and

> how DuneSQL is operated. Give the talk a listen or keep reading for a recap.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
how DuneSQL is operated. Watch the recording of the session or keep reading for a recap.
```

<!--more-->

{% youtube sCJncarnGdU %}

## Recap

> The Dune community data platform is a serverless, open access, community wide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Dune community data platform is a serverless, open access, community-wide
```

collaboration portal. Dune experienced some difficulties with blockchain data,
such as processing and ingesting raw data, deserializing and decoding function
calls and arguments, and allowing the community to build abstractions. In

> addition, their engine, DuneSQL, is Trino with custom extensions that they

Reviewer 2: Remove "In addition"

created. It runs tens of thousands of queries that are executed, saved, and
re-used each day.

> At first, Dune used PostgreSQL, where they sharded per blockchain and used a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At first, Dune used PostgreSQL, where they sharded per blockchain and used
```

vertical scaling. However, they quickly ran into bottleneck issues on storage
size and IOPS (I/O operations per second). Thus, they switched to Apache Spark
with Databricks to allow horizontal scaling and support more blockchains
processing and to support the vast query volume that they had. Unfortunately,
the result was not performant and not interactive enough. In the end, Miguel
says that, "Trino was our choice for performance reasons, for the good
environment and ecosystem, and to fully support our scheme and our datasets."
Using Trino addressed the performance issues.

> In addition, operating DuneSQL requires modifications and extensions of Trino to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Operating DuneSQL requires modifications and extensions of Trino to
```

suit the needs of the users and platform as a whole. DuneSQL needs to manage the
whole fleet and the capacity they have, because they use over 4000 CPUs per
hour, do more than 100 billion S3 requests per month, and operate over 10
clusters. To handle the scheduling and load balancing of these massive

> operations, DuneSQL use query execution services and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
operations, DuneSQL uses query execution services and the
```

> [Trino-Gateway](https://github.com/lyft/presto-gateway). To manage clusters,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[gateway](https://github.com/lyft/presto-gateway).
```

> they make it have a fixed size in order for it to have a predictable capacity

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clusters have a fixed size to have a predictable capacity
```

> and performance and to reduce the blast-radius so it does not affect other

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and performance. The gateway exposes the clusters to reduce the blast-radius so failures do not affect other
```

> and performance, and to reduce the blast-radius so it does not affect other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and performance and to reduce the blast-radius so it does not affect other
```
